Israel's war on Gaza has caused major
damage to both the built and natural
environments toxic chemicals and
explosives rain down on the Strip
sanitation and water treatment systems
are destroyed how much environmental
damage is the war causing this is Inside
Story
hello welcome to the program I'm Adrian
finegan Palestinians continue to suffer
in Israel's brutal war on Gaza tens of
thousands killed and injured with the
tall Rising daily one of the most
intense bombing campaigns since World
War II will leave not just a legacy of
grief for gaza's people but one of
lasting physical damage to the
environment in which they live the
collapse of water and sanitation systems
and Israeli threats to flood the tunnels
underneath Gaza could be catastrophic
for freshwater supplies and reserves
thousands upon thousands of Israeli and
Western supplied bombs dropped on Gaza
bring not just death but a toxic Legacy
from explosive chemicals dust and
debrief from destroyed buildings pollute
the air and ground Israel's military
offensive in Gaza is leaving a new layer
of toxic chemicals in its soil adding to
those Left Behind after the many wars
that it's waged before we'll be
discussing the environmental cost of the
war with our guests in just a few
moments but first a report from car
leg military vehicles the production of
weapons and equipment and Supply
chains the UN says Israel dropped 42
bombs an hour on Gaza during the first
few weeks of War damaging or completely
destroying more than 60% of homes it's
also attacked water treatment systems
and polluted Water Supplies leading to
sewage being dumped directly into the
sea now there are reports the Israeli
military is pumping sea waterer into the
network of underground tunnels used by
Hamas by flooding the foundation of Gaza
it means adding more problems to the
already existing problem the Earth is
very soft by being soft it is
detrimental for the civilians to have
all this flood under their knees by the
Israelis who are very much aware what
they are doing but they really don't
care human rights groups have also
accused Israel of using white phosphorus
the toxic substance not only causes
severe burns but can remain in the soil
for years causing long-term damage if
you have heavy industry bombed then you
have all the pollution in heavy industry
that gets released into the environment
in a very uncontrolled way that that can
leave residual pollution for decades
every aspect of life in Gaza is affected
by some form of pollution and with the
start of the rainy season the threat to
people and the environment from disease
acid rain and contaminated water is only
set to worsen after 16 years under
Israeli Siege Palestinians have been
forced to adapt about 60% of the
population used solar energy to power
their homes but Israeli bombing has
damaged or destroyed tens of thousands
of buildings many with solar panels it
will take years to clean up the military
pollution and contamination of the soil
water and air and the carbon emissions
from its reconstruction will come at a
cost to all forms of life in Gaza carg
Al jazer for Inside Story well along
with allegations of genocide Israel is
also accused of committing ecocide of
devastating proportions in CA broadly
defined equaide means Mass damage or
destruction to the environment to the
detriment of Life committed with full
knowledge of the risks the term was
first used during the Vietnam War by
scientists concerned at the US
government's use of millions of liters
of toxic herbicide agent orange which
caused widespread birth deformities the
chemical was used to clear forests that
gave Viet Kong Fighters cover and food
only a few countries Define ecocide as a
crime since Russia's war in Ukraine
there's been pressure in Europe to make
it a war crime which could be tried at
the international criminal
[Music]
court so let's bring in our guests for
today's discussion from rala in the
occupied West Bank we're joined by NADA
majdalani Palestinian director of Ecco
Peace Middle East the organization
brings together Jordanian Palestinian
and Israeli environmentalists to promote
shared protection of their environmental
Heritage from Rafa in southern Gaza Maan
badl who heads the Gaza program
coordination unit of the the Palestinian
Water Authority in other words he's the
engineer who oversees Water Supplies to
Gaza and also in rala hadil ikm director
general of the climate change section of
the Palestinian authorities environment
quality Authority she's just represented
Palestine at cop 28 in Dubai a warm
welcome to you all NADA let's begin with
you can we confidently describe what
Israel is doing uh in Gaza with its
bombing as
eosi yes thank you um thank you for for
for hosting us and uh I would say yes uh
what what is happening at the moment is
uh is an EOS side uh definitely the
environmental Outlook uh at the moment
uh is ex exacerbating day by day uh the
uh original condition before October 7th
and before uh uh the aggressions on Gaza
Strip uh have already been in a very
dire situation already Gaza had suffered
from uh polluted uh underground water
where 97% of the uh aquifer uh was uh
not suitable for human consumption uh we
were speaking about uh tremendous uh
problems regarding uh solid waste and
and wastewater treatment due to the uh
shortages of fuel um and and several
other issues however uh at the moment
the situation has been uh uh grave and
exacerbated uh we have uh no information
whatsoever about uh the situation in the
south in the North in terms of the
amount of destruction of infrastructure
uh facilities that support water supply
and sanitation uh the situation in the
south is uh also uh in in a very
critical situation where 1.9 million uh
people are actually uh displaced uh and
and confined in a very uh small uh
surface area uh which means we are at
the verge of an environmental
catastrophe in terms of the spread of
pandemic disease the accumulation of uh
of uh corpses in the street also from
the North and the middle areas uh that
would actually also uh provide uh
susception to to uh pandemic disease es
um we're also looking at now we have uh
the raining season has already started
uh the flooding is uh as you might have
seen already from uh jabalia refugee
camp and some areas there are videos
that are
horrifying
ofada I'm I'm sorry to interrup we we'll
come on we we'll talk some more in in
just a moment but I want to give our
other guests a chance to have have their
say too Maan um describe for us the
impact of Israel's bombing on gaza's
Water Sanitation and hygiene
infrastructure where did gazans get
their water before the war was it safe
to drink given that Gaza has been
subjected to Israeli bombing many times
in the past and how was sewage dealt
with in what state is the sewage
infrastructure now uh thank you for this
opportunity in fact Before the War uh
Gaza Strip depends mainly on the ground
water
and limited percentage of desalinated
water from the sea water desalination
plants and purchased uh small quantities
from the Israeli side through three
connections before the war almost around
35% of the population of Gaza Strip they
could use the tab water for drinking and
for other uh usage but 65% of the
population they receive receive salty
water uh for decades for decades the
Palestinian in in Gaza they over pump
the groundw and this is make a sea water
intrusion which Elevate the level of the
uh senility in addition of four decades
before the Palestinian Authority came to
and controlled Gaza and the West Bank
the majority of the gazans they use IC
tanks at the sewage disposal Pro method
and this is make a lot of pollutant
mainly the nitrate to infiltrates for
decades to the groundw which resulted in
97% of the aquaair in Gaza was unusable
it cannot be used by human
being despite all this
uh facts the Palestinian Water Authority
and the Palestinian Authority they did
and start their uh strategic planning to
rehabilitate the aquafer and from one
side and to supply the portable water
for the gazans the strategy and the
plans uh put in uh action since 19 uh
since
2015 and by the end of 20 22 we reached
to the percentage that 35% of the
population mainly
inun part of western Gaza
and now now is the uh destruction
happened in the sewage Network mainly
and the shortage of the fuel and the
shortage of electricity leftt most of
the bumping station out of use and this
is make the opportunity for sewage water
to flly blood in the streets and create
a bad environment which could impact the
public health and the environment as
well okay in the last two
days I'm sorry I'm sorry to interrupt
you can you just very briefly if Israel
carries through on its threat to flood
the tunnel Network which runs under Gaza
uh with with seawater what impact would
that have on uh on the water
infrastructure yeah now the if they will
pump these huge quantities of seawater
underneath the Gaza that
means first of all uh there's a
opportunity that this water by the ends
will infiltrates to the groundw and this
is will blute the ground water with more
sea water and this is could damage the
aquafer to a a limit that couldn't be
reversible in the coming decays the
second part that there's the structure
of the soil in Gaza is a sandy soil and
the these layers of Sandy layers they
could collapse under the pressure of
these huge quantities of water and this
is will create a chance for the
buildings and for the infrastructure
underneath to be collapsed and
destructed so not only they will emba
the aquer and they will damage the aqua
for decads but also they create
opportunity to collapsing buildings
streets under infrastructure under the
streets in in the areas hadil Israel has
for many years controlled gaza's energy
suppliers uh out of necessity gazans
have have had to find alternative
sources of power solar energy of course
being one of them what what impact has
the war had on gaza's energy
infrastructure um thank you for this
question actually Gaza is under siege
since almost 20 years ago and this
secures all of the resources natureal
resources energy resources uh so there's
a problem already present before the war
and this genocide on Gaza and imagine
the situation after this genocide that
all the Investments that have been done
during the 10 the last 10 years were all
distracted and massive destructed a lot
of solar panels and solar uh initiatives
and renewable energy Investments uh
provided by the government or the
private sector or NOS for small projects
or or for for certain areas in Gaza most
of them are destroyed and by and totally
distracted or partially distracted by
the by the Israeli um strikes on Gaza
plus uh the fuels uh that that um uh
operate all the the the the water Tre
salination units all the region or all
the the city is has been shut down and
the and the lockdown and The Siege also
uh prevent those amounts uh of of energy
resources to uh to to oper to operation
and uh um and to enable people to to
have the facility from energy and the
energy resources so this basically this
war hinders all the environment and life
aspects in Palestine and energy security
food security water security all the
environment uh components are hindered
and endangered from these massive
destructive that Gaza has has been since
the 7th of October nada I I was reading
a a piece at at al.com in which you were
quoted as saying that the war has
destroyed every aspect of gaza's
environment uh certainly I mean um we're
seeing a collective amount of of threats
to uh to the environment and to the
public health uh first of all Let's uh
not forget that uh Israel is utilizing
um um chemical weapons like white
phosphorus uh this is the completely uh
not only from a humanitarian perspective
uh that is uh dangerous to to the human
humans that are bombarded uh but as well
this is affecting uh the uh air
pollution the residues from white
phosphorus bombs is now in the
atmosphere with the rainy season we will
expect that these residues will uh
precipitate uh with the rain uh which
actually unfortunately many people now
are collecting to utilize for drinking
this is a grave situation where people
might be at the moment drinking unsafe
water that they're collecting personally
from the streets from even plastic
sheets uh and and this is one one part
that is worrying the other part that
also people are drinking salty water
that is untreated as hadil had mentioned
uh that small scale desalination units
are not operating because of the lack of
fuel therefore people are drinking salty
water and this is very dangerous to even
people who have kidney and and liver
diseases uh the uh drinking of polluted
water with sewage elements and water B
diseases uh is very high at the moment
we're seeing a rising and rocketing
numbers of children who are suffering
diarrhea uh and and bloody diarrhea uh
as well as there's a danger of parasitic
infections as well as um uh uh uh
hepatitis uh chicken pox we're seeing
those uh rocketing numbers in the
shelters Maan uh you spoke about the
fact that that even before the war 6 5%
of of people in Gaza didn't have access
to to Safe Drinking Water what will it
take to repair gaza's water
infrastructure how long will it take who
should pay for its repair and and will
gaza's water supply ever be fully safe
given the damage that that uh that has
been inflicted upon it yeah uh first of
all uh till this moment there is no
assessment uh accurate assessment to the
damage happened to the water facilities
and the infrastructure related to the
water and sanitation since uh most of
the areas are not accessible so the
accurate assessment didn't take uh took
place till today but from the news and
from the what we are seeing in the uh
North and in the Gaza City and even in
the Midland in the South the Palestinian
Authority with the inter International
donors communities and the world
supported the Palestinians in the last
10 years around 750 million us do had
been spent to rehabilitate and to
upgrade the water and was water
infrastructure and sector within the
Gaza Strip
now the majority of these facilities uh
we have one dissemination plant in the
north which is out of views it's damaged
the level of the damage cannot be
assisted remotely uh the infrastructure
uh piping system the networks are
damaged uh groundwater Wells there is so
many are impacted by the uh from the war
activities in the surrounding areas uh
we don't have accurate information about
the uh North uh West Water Tre land in
the East part of jabalia we don't have
information clear accurate information
about the wor waterer treatment plant in
the east of canun City uh but the
majority of the infrastructure in the
north and in Gaza had been impacted to a
level of or so uh considering the uh
level of the damages we think that at
least we need
uh months till we assess all the
infrastructure and the water facilities
and to account the damage happened and
we believe that we needs years to fix
the water facilities and the water
networks and the water supply system and
the was water uh I would just want to uh
make a comment related to the water
short shortage and its impact on the
public health mainly on the shelters
according to the
wh standards the minimum there should be
around 30 L per capita per day till this
moment we didn't succeed to reach this
uh quantities the majority of the people
receive less than 20 liter per cap birth
day and according to the UN records
there's around
400,000 cases of diseases that they
related to the water or the shortage of
the water skin diseases there are uh
hepatite a lot of uh cases that has been
record in the shelters and this is make
the problem of the bul the bulk public
health is more seriously a threat even
when the war is stopped to deal with all
these cases of uh diseases and uh the
possibility to be spread because of the
crowded number in the shelters because
of
the polluted environment in the entire
streets and around the shelters and even
within the shelter itself okay hadil
what will it take to repair the
environmental damage W on on Gaza can
can it ever be repaired will it ever be
fully habitable again the scale of the
destruction has Israel deliberately
tried to make Gaza uninhabitable do you
think uh Israel from the occupation says
they want to occupying Palestine in
general and uh during the last years
trying to make palestin is unable and
unhabitable for Palestinians uh and
invol with spanking Gaza but considering
Gaza is being West Bank and Gaza have
similar but yet different conditions
because both of them have water scarcity
problems but look at Gaza it's much more
100 millions and during this war it's
it's even uncomparable of the water
scarcity water situation water
limitation water pollution uh water
restriction the fuel restriction all the
aspects of life is being shut down
because of the isation want basically
the first thing the most important thing
they want is just to stop life in Gaza
Strip and in Palestine as well will be
able We Believe and in that spirit in
gazan people and Palestinian people over
the days and over the the centuries we
had the ability to live and rebuild and
to resist and to to continue but the
price is going to be so high I work in
climate action and we started to plan
for for the adaptation and mitigation
and and our priority is adaptation
because we are a country that are
situated in the in the minor region
which is under the negative impact of
climate change when we started to make
this adaptation and mitigation plans we
looked at the Israeli occupation as the
first hindering and the first challenge
that exacerbates the Palestinians
resistance against the climate action
and looking at guess specifically
climate action un unstable environment
because of the nature environment and
human-made disasters and the attacks and
the genocide and the wor who attacks
everything it's possible but on what
cast all the plans have to be changed
when planned for having a a mitigation
scenario to for 2040 we had uh renewable
energy to be operated in Gaza for for
certain percent but now in what percent
what what is the the plan that that need
to be done because now we have to start
from the zero we have nothing we were
building nine or five years ago we were
building on what was on the ground for
the facilities of energy facilities of
water facilities of Sanitation
facilities but now looking at the on the
ground what is left there what kind of
facilities what kind of plans we should
rep PL from the Zero from the scratch to
start to build a city the whole city is
under damaged with all the the
components um early uh in in the before
the war we started to work on early
warning systems and having station with
station and forecasting to uh to to to
predict the the the and enable the
agricultural sector people and all the
people to know about the the W
forecasting but now what infrastructure
we are going to talk about early warning
system while even the basic internet
line or anything is missing there so the
environment is in danger the climate
action is being is hitting Palestine is
hitting Gaza but but the price to be
multipli after this war this attack
hadan I'm sorry to interrupt you time is
is is fast running out I just want to
put one more question to Nada uh n we
talked about or you talked about the the
the the impact that Israel's bombing has
had on air quality in Gaza the use of
white
phosphorus uh the dust from collapsed
buildings some of which would have
contained
asbestos um what about unexploded
ordinance though how much of a threat
does that pose to Public Health and
rebuilding efforts and and with so many
buildings destroyed by Israel's bombing
where does all the toxic rubble go when
the K the time actually comes to
rebuild um this is a very good question
uh we don't know and uh when the time
comes to rebuild uh we would like also
to understand uh what are the conditions
of the Reconstruction in Gaza and how
they will be and also how much the
Israeli government uh and the the
political setup and the security setup
for rebuilding uh will enable for the
rebuilding uh um uh first of all uh with
the lack of space uh in in Gaza uh
already uh there was uh difficulty to
deal with the solid waste and to deal
with with domastic solid waste um and
there were several plans even uh before
to look into uh um basically waste to
energy projects and how feasible they
are uh because already there was a
shortage in space because the Gaza is
one of the most condensed and populated
uh areas on Earth uh so finding uh space
to deal with all this construction
material and waste is uh is really
questionable uh what I'm thinking is
that there's been uh as as hadil
mentioned uh we have we are a nation
that is uh Keen to build and it's it's
Keen to to find and to be Innovative to
find Solutions there's been several
startups in the past right uh to recycle
uh basically
the damage and construction material to
utilize it to B again n we're out of
time many thanks indeed to all of you
NADA M Al B and hadil ikm uh and thank
you for watching you can see the program
again at any time by visiting our
website at al.com for further discussion
join us at our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ ajins story and you can
join the conversation on X our handle at
AJ insid story from me Adrian fig the
whole team here in Doha thanks for
watching we'll see you again bye for
[Music]
now